





Network Working Group                                          B. Aboba
Request for Comments: 2809                                    Microsoft
Category: Informational                                         G. Zorn
                                                                  Cisco
                                                             April 2000


         Implementation of L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS

Status of this Memo

   This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
   not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
   memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document discusses implementation issues arising in the
   provisioning of compulsory tunneling in dial-up networks using the
   L2TP protocol.  This provisioning can be accomplished via the
   integration of RADIUS and tunneling protocols. Implementation issues
   encountered with other tunneling protocols are left to separate
   documents.
   本文档讨论了在拨号网络中使用L2TP协议提供强制隧道连接服务中出现的应用问题。
   此服务的提供能够通过RADIUS协议和隧道连接协议的结合来完成。其他隧道协议遇到
   的应用问题遗留到其他独立的文档描述。

1. Terminology

   Voluntary Tunneling
   自发隧道连接
              In voluntary tunneling, a tunnel is created by the user,
              typically via use of a tunneling client.
              在自发隧道连接中，隧道由用户创建，典型的是通过应用隧道连
              接客户端。
   Compulsory Tunneling
   强制隧道连接
              In compulsory tunneling, a tunnel is created without any
              action from the user and without allowing the user any
              choice.
              在强制隧道连接中，隧道的创建不涉及到任何的用户行为，并且不允许
              用户有任何选择。
   Tunnel Network Server
   隧道网络服务器
              This is a server which terminates a tunnel. In L2TP
              terminology, this is known as the L2TP Network Server
              (LNS).
              这是用来终结隧道的服务器。在L2TP的术语中，此服务器被称为L2TP
              网络服务器（LNS）。








Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 1]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   Network Access Server
   网络接入服务器
              The Network Access Server (NAS) is the device that clients
              contact in order to get access to the network. In L2TP
              terminology, a NAS performing compulsory tunneling is
              referred to as the L2TP Access Concentrator (LAC).
              网络接入服务器（NAS）是客户端为了接入网络而连接的网络设备。在L2TP
              术语中，执行强制隧道连接的NAS被称为L2TP接入集中器（LAC）。

   RADIUS authentication server
   RADIUS 认证服务器
              This is a server which provides for
              authentication/authorization via the protocol described in
              [1].
              这是通过〔1〕协议提供认证/授权服务的服务器。

   RADIUS proxy
   RADIUS 代理
              In order to provide for the routing of RADIUS
              authentication requests, a RADIUS proxy can be employed.
              To the NAS, the RADIUS proxy appears to act as a RADIUS
              server, and to the RADIUS server, the proxy appears to act
              as a RADIUS client.  Can be used to locate the tunnel
              endpoint when realm-based tunneling is used.
              为了提供RADIUS认证请求的转发功能，可以使用RADIUS 代理。
              在NAS看来，RADIUS 代理表现为一个RADIUS服务器；对于Radius 服务器，
              RADIUS 代理表现为一个RADIUS 客户端。当实现基于域的隧道连接时，
              这可以用来定位隧道的终结点。

2.  Requirements language

   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "optional",
   "recommended", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as
   described in [4].

3.  Introduction

   Many applications of tunneling protocols involve dial-up network
   access.  Some, such as the provisioning of secure access to corporate
   intranets via the Internet, are characterized by voluntary tunneling:
   the tunnel is created at the request of the user for a specific
   purpose. Other applications involve compulsory tunneling: the tunnel
   is created without any action from the user and without allowing the
   user any choice.
   许多隧道连接协议应用涉及到拨号网络。其中一些，如通过Internet提供到
   企业Intranets的安全访问服务，表现出自发隧道连接的特征：隧道创建基于
   用户的请求，是为了明确的目的。其他一些应用涉及到强制隧道连接：隧道的
   创建没有任何用户的行为并且不允许任何用户的选择。

   Examples of applications that might be implemented using compulsory
   tunnels are Internet software upgrade servers, software registration
   servers and banking services.  These are all services which, without
   compulsory tunneling, would probably be provided using dedicated
   networks or at least dedicated network access servers (NAS), since
   they are characterized by the need to limit user access to specific
   hosts.
   如软件升级服务器、软件注册服务器和银行服务，是可以通过使用强制隧道的实现例子。
   如果没有强制隧道连接的话，这些服务将可能使用专门的网络，或者至少是专门的
   网络接入服务器（NAS）来实现。其原因是这些服务的需求特征是限制用户访问特
   殊的服务器。

   Given the existence of widespread support for compulsory tunneling,
   however, these types of services could be accessed via any Internet
   service provider (ISP).  The most popular means of authorizing dial-
   up network users today is through the RADIUS protocol. The use of
   RADIUS allows the dial-up users' authorization and authentication



Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 2]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   data to be maintained in a central location, rather than on each NAS.
   It makes sense to use RADIUS to centrally administer compulsory
   tunneling, since RADIUS is widely deployed and was designed to carry
   this type of information.  New RADIUS attributes are needed to carry
   the tunneling information from the RADIUS server to the NAS. Those
   attributes are defined in [3].
   但是，在存在对强制隧道连接分布广泛的支持的条件下，这些类型的服务能够通
   过任何Internet服务提供商（ISP）得到。今天，拨号网络用户授权的最普遍的协
   议是通过RADIUS。使用RADIUS允许拨号用户的认证和授权数据能被保存在一个中心
   存储地，而不是在每个NAS上。使用RADIUS来集中的管理强制隧道连接是有意义的，
   因为RADIUS被广泛的部署，并且被设计来承载此类型的信息。需要新的RADIUS属性
   来承载从RADIUS服务器到NAS的隧道连接信息。这些属性被定义在〔3〕中。

3.1.  Advantages of RADIUS-based compulsory tunneling
      基于RADIUS的强制隧道连接的优点

   Current proposals for routing of tunnel requests include static
   tunneling, where all users are automatically tunneled to a given
   endpoint, and realm-based tunneling, where the tunnel endpoint is
   determined from the realm portion of the userID. User-based tunneling
   as provided by integration of RADIUS and tunnel protocols offers
   significant advantages over both of these approaches.
   当前的对路由隧道请求的建议包括了静态隧道连接和基于域的隧道连接。静态隧道
   连接中所有的用户被自动隧道定向到一个指定的终结点；基于域的隧道连接的终结
   点由用户ID（userID)的域部分决定。基于用户的隧道连接，因为由RADIUS和隧道协
   议相结合来提供，具有超过此两种方法的重要的优势。
  

   Static tunneling requires dedication of a NAS device to the purpose.
   In the case of an ISP, this is undesirable because it requires them
   to dedicate a NAS to tunneling service for a given customer, rather
   than allowing them to use existing NASes deployed in the field. As a
   result static tunneling is likely to be costly for deployment of a
   global service.
   静态隧道连接需要NAS设备来决定目的地。在ISP的情形下，这并不如其所愿，
   因为这需要他们必须专用一个NAS设备于一个给定的用户提供隧道连接服务，而不是
   允许他们使用已经部署在这地区的NAS设备。导致的结果，静态隧道连接如果全局部
   署的话，将会导致高额成本。

   Realm-based tunneling assumes that all users within a given realm
   wish to be treated the same way. This limits flexibility in account
   management.  For example, BIGCO may desire to provide Janet with an
   account that allows access to both the Internet and the intranet,
   with Janet's intranet access provided by a tunnel server located in
   the engineering department. However BIGCO may desire to provide Fred
   with an account that provides only access to the intranet, with
   Fred's intranet access provided by a tunnel network server located in
   the sales department. Such a situation cannot be accommodated with
   realm-based tunneling, but can be accommodated via user-based
   tunneling as enabled by the attributes defined in [3].
   基于域的隧道连接认为所有的在给定域中的用户将被相同对待。这限制了账号管理的
   灵活性。例如，BIGCO 可能希望提供Janet一个允许同时访问Internet和Intranet的
   账号，Janet的Intranet连接由工程部的隧道网络服务器提供；然而，BIGCO可能希望
   提供Fred只能访问Intranet的账号，而Fred的Intranet连接由销售部的隧道网络服务
   器提供。这种的情况不能被基于域的隧道连接所兼容，但是能被基于用户的隧道连接
   所包含。〔3〕中定义的属性使这种基于用户的连接成为可能。

4.  Authentication alternatives
    认证的两种选择

   RADIUS-based compulsory tunneling can support both single
   authentication, where the user is authenticated at the NAS or tunnel
   server, or dual authentication, where the user is authenticated at
   both the NAS and the tunnel server. When single authentication is
   supported, a variety of modes are possible, including telephone-
   number based authentication.  When dual-authentication is used, a
   number of modes are available, including dual CHAP authentications;
   







Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 3]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   CHAP/EAP authentication; CHAP/PAP(token) authentication; and EAP/EAP
   authentication, using the same EAP type for both authentications. EAP
   is described in [5].
   基于RADIUS的强制隧道连接既能支持在NAS或隧道服务器的单一认证，又能支持需在
   两端进行的双重认证。当支持单一认证的时候，多种模式就变为可能了，包括
   基于电话号码的认证。当支持双重认证的时候，一些模式就可实现了，包括双重CHAP认证、
   CHAP/EAP 认证、CHAP/PAP（token）认证、EAP/EAP认证（两端认证使用相同的EAP类型）。
   EAP认证在〔5〕中描述。

   The alternatives are described in more detail below.
   认证方式在下面详细描述。

4.1.  Single authentication
      单一认证

   Single authentication alternatives include:
   单一认证包括：

   NAS authentication
   NAS authentication with RADIUS reply forwarding
   Tunnel server authentication
   NAS 认证
   RADIUS回应转发的NAS认证
   隧道服务器认证

4.1.1.  NAS authentication
        NAS 认证

   With this approach, authentication and authorization (including
   tunneling information) occurs once, at the NAS. The advantages of
   this approach are that it disallows network access for unauthorized
   NAS users, and permits accounting to done at the NAS.  Disadvantages
   are that it requires that the tunnel server trust the NAS, since no
   user authentication occurs at the tunnel server. Due to the lack of
   user authentication, accounting cannot take place at the tunnel
   server with strong assurance that the correct party is being billed.
   使用这种方式，认证和授权（包括隧道连接信息）在NAS端发生一次。这种方式的
   优点是，它不允许未授权的用户访问网络，而且可以在NAS端实现计费。缺点是它
   必须建立在隧道服务器信任（trust）NAS的基础上，因为用户认证不发生在隧道服
   务器端。由于没有用户认证，不能在隧道服务器端实现能确保正确部分被记帐的计费。

   NAS-only authentication is most typically employed along with LCP
   forwarding and tunnel authentication, both of which are supported in
   L2TP, described in [2].  Thus, the tunnel server can be set up to
   accept all calls occurring within authenticated tunnels, without
   requiring PPP authentication.  However, this approach is not
   compatible with roaming, since the tunnel server will typically only
   be set up to accept tunnels from a restricted set of NASes. A typical
   initiation sequence looks like this:
   单一NAS认证最典型的应用是结合LCP转发和隧道认证，这两种在L2TP中都支持，
   在〔2〕中有描述。因此，隧道服务器可以被设置为接受任何发生在认证通过的
   隧道中的的呼叫，而并不需要进行PPP 认证。但是，这种方式并不能兼容漫游，
   因为隧道服务器只能典型的被设置为接受来自有限数量的NAS设备的隧道。一个
   典型的初始化序列如下：
   

   Client and NAS: Call Connected
   Client and NAS: PPP LCP negotiation
   Client and NAS: PPP authentication
   NAS to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request
   RADIUS server to NAS: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Incoming-Call-Request w/LCP forwarding
   Tunnel Server to NAS: L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Incoming-Call-Connected
   Client and Tunnel Server: NCP negotiation
   用户客户端 和 NAS：呼叫连接
   用户客户端 和 NAS：PPP LCP 协商
   NAS 到 RADIUS服务器：RADIUS 认证请求
   RADIUS服务器 到 NAS：RADIUS 认证接受/认证拒绝
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP Incoming-Call-Request w/LCP forwarding
   隧道服务器 到 NAS：L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP Incoming-Call-Connected
   用户客户端 和 隧道服务器：NCP 协商







Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 4]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   The process begins with an incoming call to the NAS, and the PPP LCP
   negotiation between the client and the NAS. In order to authenticate
   the client, the NAS will send a RADIUS Access-Request to the RADIUS
   server and will receive a RADIUS Access-Accept including tunnel
   attributes, or an Access-Reject.
   此过程开始于到NAS的接入呼叫和用户客户端和NAS间的PPP LCP协商。为了认证
   用户端，NAS将发送RADIUS认证请求到RADIUS服务器，并将收到RADIUS认证接受
   回应或者拒绝回应，认证接受回应中包含隧道属性。

   In the case where an L2TP tunnel is indicated, the NAS will now bring
   up a control connection if none existed before, and the NAS and
   tunnel server will bring up the call. At this point, data will begin
   to flow through the tunnel.  The NAS will typically employ LCP
   forwarding, although it is also possible for the tunnel server to
   renegotiate LCP.  If LCP renegotiation is to be permitted, the NAS
   SHOULD NOT send an LCP CONFACK completing LCP negotiation. Rather
   than sending an LCP CONFACK, the NAS will instead send an LCP
   Configure-Request packet, described in [6].  The Client MAY then
   renegotiate LCP, and from that point forward, all PPP packets
   originated from the client will be encapsulated and sent to the
   tunnel server.
   在L2TP隧道被指明的情况下，如果此隧道不存在，NAS将在此时建立一条控制
   连接，NAS和隧道服务器将建立起这次呼叫。到此时，数据将开始在隧道上传送。
   虽然隧道服务器重新进行LCP协商也是可能的，但典型的NAS将使用LCP转发。
   如果LCP重新协商被允许，NAS不能（SHOULD NOT）发送LCP CONFACK，相反NAS
   将发送一个LCP 配置请求（Configure-Request）包，在〔6〕中有描述。用户
   客户端可能（MAY）进行LCP重新协商，从此时起，所有的从用户客户端发出的
   PPP包将被封装发送到隧道服务器。

   Since address assignment will occur at the tunnel server, the client
   and NAS MUST NOT begin NCP negotiation. Instead, NCP negotiation will
   occur between the client and the tunnel server.
   因为地址分配将发生在隧道服务器那端，用户客户端和NAS不应该（MUST NOT）
   启动NCP协商。相反，NCP协商将在用户客户端和隧道服务器间发生。

4.1.2.  NAS authentication with RADIUS reply forwarding
        RADIUS回应转发的NAS认证

   With this approach, authentication and authorization occurs once at
   the NAS and the RADIUS reply is forwarded to the tunnel server. This
   approach disallows network access for unauthorized NAS users; does
   not require trust between the NAS and tunnel server; and allows for
   accounting to be done at both ends of the tunnel. However, it also
   requires that both ends share the same secret with the RADIUS server,
   since that is the only way that the tunnel server can check the
   RADIUS Access-Reply.
   在这种方式下，认证和授权将在NAS发生一次，RADIUS回应被转发到隧道服务器。
   这种方式不允许未授权的用户访问网络；不需要NAS和隧道服务器间的相互信任；
   允许计费同时在两端进行。但是，它需要两端共享相同的和RADIUS 服务器间
   的共享密钥，因为这是隧道服务器能检查RADIUS认证回应的唯一方法。

   In this approach, the tunnel server will share secrets with all the
   NASes and associated RADIUS servers, and there is no provision for
   LCP renegotiation by the tunnel server. Also, the tunnel server will
   need to know how to handle and verify RADIUS Access-Accept messages.
   在此方式下，隧道服务器将同所有的NAS设备共享和RADIUS服务器通信的共享密钥，
   而且隧道服务器将不能提供LCP重新协商。另外，隧道服务器将需要知道如何去
   处理和验证认证接受消息。

   While this scheme can be workable if the reply comes directly from a
   RADIUS server, it would become unmanageable if a RADIUS proxy is
   involved, since the reply would be authenticated using the secret
   shared by the client and proxy, rather than the RADIUS server. As a
   result, this scheme is impractical.
   如果回应直接来自一个RADIUS服务器的话这种方案是可行的。但如果RADIUS代理
   被涉及，那将变得不可管理，因为此回应将被使用客户端和代理间的共享密钥进
   行验证，而不是RADIUS服务器的密钥。导致的结果是此方案是不实际的。







Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 5]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


4.1.2.1. Tunnel server authentication
         隧道服务器认证

   In this scheme, authentication and authorization occurs once at the
   tunnel server.  This requires that the NAS determine that the user
   needs to be tunneled (through RADIUS or NAS configuration). Where
   RADIUS is used, the determination can be made using one of the
   following methods:
   在这个方案中，认证和授权在隧道服务器端发生一次。这需要NAS判定需要被隧道定向的
   用户（通过RADIUS或NAS 配置）。如果RADIUS被使用，此判定可使用下面的一种方法：

   Telephone-number based authentication
   UserID
   基于电话号码的认证
   用户ID（userID)

4.1.2.2.  Telephone-number based authentication
          基于电话号码的认证

   Using the Calling-Station-Id and Called-Station-Id RADIUS attributes,
   authorization and subsequent tunnel attributes can be based on the
   phone number originating the call, or the number being called. This
   allows the RADIUS server to authorize users based on the calling
   phone number or to provide tunnel attributes based on the Calling-
   Station-Id or Called-Station-Id.  Similarly, in L2TP the tunnel
   server MAY choose to reject or accept the call based on the Dialed
   Number and Dialing Number included in the L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   packet sent by the NAS.  Accounting can also take place based on the
   Calling-Station-Id and Called-Station-Id.
   使用主叫号码（Calling-Station-Id）和被叫号码（Called-Station-Id）RADIUS
   属性，授权和随后的隧道属性可以基于以发起呼叫的电话号或被叫的号码。这允许
   RADIUS服务器能够基于用户的呼叫电话号码来授权用户，或者根据主叫号码或被叫
   号码来提供隧道属性。相似的，在L2TP中，隧道服务器可能（MAY）选择拒绝或接受
   包含在NAS 发送的L2TP Incoming-Call-Request 包中的被拨叫号码和主拨叫号码。
   计费也可基于主叫号码和被叫号码进行。

   RADIUS as defined in [1] requires that an Access-Request packet
   contain a User-Name attribute as well as either a CHAP-Password or
   User-Password attribute, which must be non-empty.  To satisfy this
   requirement the Called-Station-Id or Calling-Station-Id MAY be
   furnished in the User-Name attribute and a dummy value MAY be used in
   the User-Password or CHAP-Password attribute.
   在〔1〕中定义的RADIUS需要在认证请求中包含一条用户名（User-Name）属性和CHAP密码
   （CHAP-Password）或用户密码（User-Password）之一，而且必须为非空。为了满足这样
   的要求，主叫号码或被叫号码可能（MAY）被置放在用户名属性，并且虚假值可能（MAY）
   被用在用户密码（User-Password）或CHAP密码属性中。

   In the case of telephone-number based authentication, a typical
   initiation sequence looks like this:
   在基于电话号码的认证情况下，一个典型的初始化序列如下：

   Client and NS: Call Connected
   NAS to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request
   RADIUS server to NAS: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   Tunnel Server to NAS: L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP LCP negotiation
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP authentication
   Tunnel Server to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request (optional)
   RADIUS server to Tunnel Server: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   Client and Tunnel Server: NCP negotiation
   用户客户端 和 NAS：呼叫连接
   NAS 到 RADIUS服务器：RADIUS认证请求
   RADIUS服务器 到 NAS：RADIUS认证接受/认证拒绝
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP  Incoming-Call-Request
   隧道服务器 到 NAS：L2TP  Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   用户客户端 和 隧道服务器：PPP LCP 协商
   用户客户端 和 隧道服务器：PPP认证
   隧道服务器 到 RADIUS服务器：RADIUS认证请求（可选）
   RADIUS服务器 到 隧道服务器：RADIUS认证接受/认证拒绝
   用户客户端 和 隧道服务器：NCP 协商






Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 6]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   The process begins with an incoming call to the NAS. If configured
   for telephone-number based authentication, the NAS sends a RADIUS
   Access-Request containing the Calling-Station-Id and the Called-
   Station-Id attributes. The RADIUS server will then respond with a
   RADIUS Access-Accept or Access-Reject.
   此流程从到NAS的接入呼叫开始。如果被配置为基于电话号码的认证，NAS发送
   包含主叫号码和被叫号码的认证请求，然后RADIUS服务器间回应认证接受或认
   证拒绝。   

   The NAS MUST NOT begin PPP authentication before bringing up the
   tunnel.  If timing permits, the NAS MAY bring up the tunnel prior to
   beginning LCP negotiation with the peer. If this is done, then LCP
   will not need to be renegotiated between the peer and tunnel server,
   nor will LCP forwarding need to be employed.
   NAS不应该（MUST NOT）在建立隧道前开始PPP认证。如果相互配合的时间允许，
   NAS可以（MAY）在和对端开始LCP协商之前建立隧道。如果这些完成，然后LCP
   将不需要在对端和隧道服务器间被重新协商，LCP转发也不必进行。

   If the initial telephone-number based authentication is unsuccessful,
   the RADIUS server sends a RADIUS Access-Reject. In this case, the NAS
   MUST send an LCP-Terminate and disconnect the user.
   如果基于电话号码的初始化认证不成功，RADIUS服务器将回应一个RADIUS认证拒绝。
   在这种情况下，NAS必须（MUST）发送一个LCP终结（LCP-Terminate）并切断用户。

   In the case where tunnel attributes are included in the RADIUS
   Access-Accept, and an L2TP tunnel is indicated, the NAS will now
   bring up a control connection if none existed before. This is
   accomplished by sending an L2TP Start-Control-Connection-Request
   message to the tunnel server.  The tunnel server will then reply with
   an L2TP Start-Control-Connection-Reply.  If this message indicates an
   error, or if the control connection is terminated at any future time,
   then the NAS MUST send an LCP-Terminate and disconnect the user.
   在隧道属性被包括在RADIUS认证接受回应中，并且一个L2TP隧道被指明的情况下，
   如果以前没有连接存在的话，NAS将在此时建立一条控制连接。这是通过发送一个
   L2TP Start-Control-Connection-Request消息到隧道服务器来完成。如果这个
   消息指示出错，或者这控制连接在不久后就要被终结，NAS必须（MUST）发送
   一个LCP终结（LCP-Terminate）并切断用户。

   The NAS will then send an L2TP Incoming-Call-Request message to the
   tunnel server. Among other things, this message will contain the Call
   Serial Number, which along with the NAS-IP-Address and Tunnel-
   Server-Endpoint is used to uniquely identify the call. The tunnel
   server will reply with an L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply message. If this
   message indicates an error, then the NAS MUST send an LCP-Terminate
   and disconnect the user. If no error is indicated, the NAS then
   replies with an L2TP Incoming-Call-Connected message.
   接着NAS将发送一个L2TP Incoming-Call-Request消息到隧道服务器。在其他事件中，
   这个消息将包含呼叫序列号，它和NAS地址属性（NAS-IP-Address）和隧道服
   务器终结点属性（Tunnel-Server-Endpoint）一起被用来唯一的确定一次呼叫。
   隧道服务器将回应一个L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply 消息。如果这个消息指示出错，
   NAS必须（MUST）发送一个LCP终结（LCP-Terminate）并切断用户。如果没有错误被
   指明，NAS将回应一个L2TP Incoming-Call-Connected消息。

   At this point, data can begin to flow through the tunnel. If LCP
   negotiation had been begun between the NAS and the client, then LCP
   forwarding may be employed, or the client and tunnel server will now
   renegotiate LCP and begin PPP authentication. Otherwise, the client
   and tunnel server will negotiate LCP for the first time, and then
   move on to PPP authentication.
   到了此时，数据可以开始通过隧道传输。如果NAS和用户客户端之间已经开始LCP协商，
   LCP转发将会被使用，或者用户客户端和隧道服务器间将会在此时进行LCP重新协商，
   并开始进行PPP认证。否则，用户客户端和隧道服务器将进行第一次LCP协商，然后
   继续进行到PPP认证。

   If a renegotiation is required, at the time that the renegotiation
   begins, the NAS SHOULD NOT have sent an LCP CONFACK completing LCP
   negotiation, and the client and NAS MUST NOT have begun NCP
   negotiation.  Rather than sending an LCP CONFACK, the NAS will
   instead send an LCP Configure-Request Packet, described in [6].  The
   Client MAY then renegotiate LCP, and from that point forward, all PPP
   packets originated from the client will be encapsulated and sent to



Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 7]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   the tunnel server.  When LCP re-negotiation has been concluded, the
   NCP phase will begin, and the tunnel server will assign an address to
   the client.
   如果重新协商是必须的，在进行重新协商开始的时候，NAS不该（SHOULD NOT）
   已经发送一个LCP CONFACK完成了LCP协商，并且用户客户端和NAS之间不应该
   （MUST NOT）已经开始NCP协商。与发送一个LCP CONFACK相反，NAS将发送一个
   LCP配置请求（LCP Configure-Request）包，此情况在〔6〕中描述。随后用户
   客户端可能（MAY）进行LCP重新协商，并且从此以后，所有的源于用户客户端的
   PPP包将被封装并发送到隧道服务器。到LCP重新协商已经终止的时候，NCP协商
   阶段将开始，隧道服务器将给用户客户端分配地址。

   If L2TP is being used as the tunnel protocol, and LCP renegotiation
   is required, the NAS MAY in its initial setup notification include a
   copy of the LCP CONFACKs sent in each direction which completed LCP
   negotiation. The tunnel server MAY then use this information to avoid
   an additional LCP negotiation. With L2TP, the initial setup
   notification can also include the authentication information required
   to allow the tunnel server to authenticate the user and decide to
   accept or decline the connection. However, in telephone-number based
   authentication, PPP authentication MUST NOT occur prior to the NAS
   bringing up the tunnel.  As a result, L2TP authentication forwarding
   MUST NOT be employed.
   如果L2TP被用作隧道协议，并且LCP重新协商为必需，NAS可能（MAY）在初始化
   建立阶段通知中包含一份两个方向的LCP CONFACK拷贝，此发向两个方向的
   LCP CONFACK是用来完成LCP协商的。隧道服务器可以（MAY）使用这些信息来避免
   额外的LCP协商。如果使用L2TP，初始化阶段通知中还可以包括需要的认证信息，来允
   许隧道服务器认证用户，以决定是接受或拒绝此连接。但是，在基于电话号码的认证中，
   PPP认证不应该（MUST NOT）在NAS建立隧道前发生。这导致的结果是，L2TP认证转发
   不应该（MUST NOT）被使用。

   In performing the PPP authentication, the tunnel server can access
   its own user database, or alternatively can send a RADIUS Access-
   Request.  The latter approach is useful in cases where authentication
   forwarding is enabled, such as with roaming or shared use networks.
   In this case, the RADIUS and tunnel servers are under the same
   administration and are typically located close together, possibly on
   the same LAN.  Therefore having the tunnel server act as a RADIUS
   client provides for unified user administration. Note that the tunnel
   server's RADIUS Access-Request is typically sent directly to the
   local RADIUS server rather than being forwarded via a proxy.
   在进行PPP认证时，隧道服务器能访问自己的用户信息库，或者可以发送RADIUS认证
   请求。后一种方法在能进行认证转发的情况下是很有用的，例如漫游或共享网络。
   在这种情况（后一种情况）下，RADIUS服务器和隧道服务器在相同的管理下，并且典型
   的放在相近的地点，一种可能是在相同的LAN中。因此把隧道服务器用作RADIUS客户端，
   这为统一的用户管理提供了条件。请注意隧道服务器的认证请求典型的直接发送到当地
   的RADIUS服务器，而非通过RADIUS代理转发。

   The interactions involved in initiation of a compulsory tunnel with
   telephone-number based authentication are summarized below. In order
   to simplify the diagram that follows, we have left out the client.
   However, it is understood that the client participates via PPP
   negotiation, authentication and subsequent data interchange with the
   Tunnel Server.
   支持基于电话号码的认证的强制隧道的初始化涉及的交互过程简述如下。为了简化
   下面的流程，我们忽略了用户客户端。但是，用户客户端通过同隧道服务器的
   PPP协商、认证和后继的数据交换参与流程是可以理解的。


















Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 8]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


                                  INITIATION SEQUENCE

   NAS                            Tunnel Server       RADIUS Server
   ---                            -------------       -------------
   Call connected
   Send RADIUS
    Access-Request
    with Called-Station-Id,
    and/or Calling-Station-Id
   LCP starts
   呼叫请求
   发送包含主叫和/或被叫号码的
   RADIUS认证请求
   LCP 开始
                                                      IF authentication
                                                      succeeds
                                                       Send ACK
                                                      ELSE Send NAK
                                                      如果认证成功
                                                          发送接受（ACK）
                                                      否则
                                                          发送拒绝（NAK）
   IF NAK DISCONNECT
   ELSE
    IF no control
     connection exists
     Send
     Start-Control-Connection-Request
     to Tunnel Server
   如果 拒绝（NAK） 切断连接
   否则
       如果 没有控制连接存在
           发送Start-Control-Connection-Request
           到隧道服务器
                                Send
                                Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                to NAS
                                发送Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                到NAS
    ENDIF
    结束

   Send
   Incoming-Call-Request
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送Incoming-Call-Request
   消息到隧道服务器
                                Send Incoming-Call-Reply
                                to NAS
                                发送Incoming-Call-Reply
                                到 NAS
   Send
   Incoming-Call-Connected
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送Incoming-Call-Connected
   消息到隧道服务器

   Send data through the tunnel
   通过隧道发送数据
                                Re-negotiate LCP,
                                authenticate user,
                                bring up IPCP,
                                start accounting
                                重新协商 LCP
                                认证用户
                                建立 IPCP
                                开始计费











Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                      [Page 9]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


4.1.2.3.  User-Name
          用户名

   Since authentication will occur only at the tunnel-server, tunnel
   initiation must occur prior to user authentication at the NAS. As a
   result, this scheme typically uses either the domain portion of the
   userID or attribute-specific processing on the RADIUS server.  Since
   the user identity is never verified by the NAS, either the tunnel
   server owner must be willing to be billed for all incoming calls, or
   other information such as the Calling-Station-Id must be used to
   verify the user's identity for accounting purposes.
   既然认证将仅仅在隧道服务器端发生，NAS端隧道的初始化必须发生在用户认证之
   前。导致的结果，此方案典型的使用用户ID（userID）的域部分或在RADIUS服务器
   上的具体属性处理。因为用户的身份将绝不被NAS验证，或者隧道服务器的所有者必
   须愿意为所有的呼叫付费，或者其他信息如主叫号码为了计费的目的必须被用来验
   证用户的身份。

   In attribute-specific processing RADIUS may be employed and an
   attribute is used to signal tunnel initiation.  For example, tunnel
   attributes can be sent back if the User-Password attribute contains a
   dummy value (such as "tunnel" or "L2TP"). Alternatively, a userID
   beginning with a special character ('*') could be used to indicate
   the need to initiate a tunnel.  When attribute-specific processing is
   used, the tunnel server may need to renegotiate LCP.
   在具体属性处理中RADIUS可能被使用，并且一条属性被用作触发隧道初始化。
   例如：如果用户密码（User-Password）包含了一个虚假值（如“tunnel、L2TP”），
   隧道属性就能被回送。相对应另一种，以字符（'*'）开头的用户ID（userID）能
   被用来表明需要初始化一条隧道。当具体属性处理被使用的时候，隧道服务器可能
   需要进行重新协商LCP。
   

   Another solution involves using the domain portion of the userID; all
   users in domain X would be tunneled to address Y. This proposal
   supports compulsory tunneling, but does not provide for user-based
   tunneling.
   另一种解决的方法涉及到使用用户ID（userID）的域部分；在域X中的所有用户将
   被隧道定向到地址Y。此建议支持强制隧道连接，但不支持基于用户的隧道连接。

   In order for the NAS to start accounting on the connection, it would
   need to use the identity claimed by the user in authenticating to the
   tunnel server, since it did not verify the identity via RADIUS.
   However, in order for that to be of any use in accounting, the tunnel
   endpoint needs to have an account relationship with the NAS owner.
   Thus even if a user has an account with the NAS owner, they cannot
   use this account for tunneling unless the tunnel endpoint also has a
   business relationship with the NAS owner. Thus this approach is
   incompatible with roaming.
   因为不通过RADIUS进行对用户身份验证，为了NAS能对连接开始计费，需要使用
   用户声明在到隧道服务器的认证中的用户身份。但是，为了计费的完全有效，
   隧道终结端需要和NAS所有者有账号上的关系。因此甚至用户在NAS所有者这边有
   账号，他并不能使用此账号来实现隧道连接，除非隧道终结点也和NAS所有者间
   有商业上的关系。因此此方式并不兼容漫游。

   A typical initiation sequence involving use of the domain portion of
   the userID looks like this:
   一个典型的涉及到用户ID的域的初始化序列如下：

   Client and NAS: Call Connected
   Client and NAS: PPP LCP negotiation
   Client and NAS: Authentication
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   Tunnel Server to NAS: L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP LCP re-negotiation
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP authentication
   Tunnel Server to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request (optional)
   RADIUS server to Tunnel Server: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   Client and Tunnel Server: NCP negotiation
   用户客户端和NAS：呼叫连接
   用户客户端和NAS：PPP LCP协商
   用户客户端和NAS：认证
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   隧道服务器到NAS：L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS 到隧道服务器： L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：PPP LCP 重新协商
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：PPP 认证
   隧道服务器到RADIUS服务器：RADIUS认证请求（可选）
   RADIUS服务器到隧道服务器：RADIUS 认证接受/拒绝
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：NCP协商



Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 10]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   The process begins with an incoming call to the NAS, and the PPP LCP
   negotiation between the Client and NAS. The authentication process
   will then begin and based on the domain portion of the userID, the
   NAS will now bring up a control connection if none existed before,
   and the NAS and tunnel server will bring up the call. At this point,
   data MAY begin to flow through the tunnel.  The client and tunnel
   server MAY now renegotiate LCP and will complete PPP authentication.
   此过程开始于到NAS的呼叫和用户客户端和NAS间的PPP LCP协商。然后认证过程
   将开始并基于用户ID（userID）的域部分，此时如果还没有建立控制连接，NAS
   将建立，接着NAS和隧道服务器将建立此次呼叫。到此时，数据可以（MAY）通过
   隧道传递。现在用户客户端和隧道服务器间可能（MAY）重新协商LCP并完成PPP
   认证。

   At the time that the renegotiation begins, the NAS SHOULD NOT have
   sent an LCP CONFACK completing LCP negotiation, and the client and
   NAS MUST NOT have begun NCP negotiation. Rather than sending an LCP
   CONFACK, the NAS will instead send an LCP Configure-Request packet,
   described in [6].  The Client MAY then renegotiate LCP, and from that
   point forward, all PPP packets originated from the client will be
   encapsulated and sent to the tunnel server.  In single authentication
   compulsory tunneling, L2TP authentication forwarding MUST NOT be
   employed.  When LCP re-negotiation has been concluded, the NCP phase
   will begin, and the tunnel server will assign an address to the
   client.
   在重新协商开始的时候，NAS不能（SHOULD NOT）已经发送了LCP CONFACK来完成
   LCP协商，并且用户客户端和NAS间不应该（MUST NOT）已经开始NCP协商。与发送
   一个LCP CNFACK相反，NAS将发送一个LCP配置请求（LCP Configure-Request）包，
   在〔6〕中描述。然后用户客户端可以（MAY）重新协商LCP，自此以后，所有的源于
   用户客户端PPP包将被封装并发送到隧道服务器。在单一认证的强制隧道连接中，
   L2TP认证转发不应该（MUST NOT）被使用。当LCP重新协商已经被终结，NCP协商
   阶段将开始，隧道服务器将给用户客户端分配地址。

   In performing the PPP authentication, the tunnel server can access
   its own user database, or it MAY send a RADIUS Access-Request. After
   the tunnel has been brought up, the NAS and tunnel server can start
   accounting.
   在进行PPP认证的时，隧道服务器可以访问自己的用户数据库，或者可以发送RADIUS
   认证请求。在隧道被建立后，NAS和隧道服务器可以开始计费。



























Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 11]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   The interactions are summarized below.
   交互过程简述如下：

                                  INITIATION SEQUENCE

   NAS                            Tunnel Server       RADIUS Server
   ---                            -------------       -------------
   Call accepted
   LCP starts
   Authentication
    phase starts
   IF no control
    connection exists
    Send
    Start-Control-Connection-Request
    to Tunnel Server
   ENDIF
   呼叫接受
   LCP 协商开始
   认证阶段开始
   如果 没有控制连接存在
        发送Start-Control-Connection-Request
        到隧道服务器
   结束
                                IF no control
                                 connection exists
                                 Send
                                 Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                 to NAS
                                ENDIF
                                如果 没有控制连接存在
                                发送 Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                到NAS
                                结束

   Send
   Incoming-Call-Request
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送 Incoming-Call-Request
   消息到隧道服务器
                                Send Incoming-Call-Reply
                                to NAS
                                发送 Incoming-Call-Reply
                                到 NAS
   Send
   Incoming-Call-Connected
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送 Incoming-Call-Connected
   消息到隧道服务器

   Send data through the tunnel
   通过隧道传送数据
                                Re-negotiate LCP,
                                authenticate user,
                                bring up IPCP,
                                start accounting
                                重新协商LCP
                                认证用户
                                建立 IPCP
                                开始计费

4.2.  Dual authentication
      双重认证

   In this scheme, authentication occurs both at the NAS and the tunnel
   server. This requires the dial-up client to handle dual
   authentication, with attendant LCP re-negotiations. In order to allow
   the NAS and tunnel network server to authenticate against the same
   database, this requires RADIUS client capability on the tunnel
   network server, and possibly a RADIUS proxy on the NAS end.
   在此方案中，认证在NAS端和隧道服务器端都发送。这需要拨号用户客户端使用
   辅助的LCP重新协商来处理双重认证。为了允许NAS和隧道服务器能在相同的
   数据库认证，需要RADIUS客户端和隧道服务器相兼容，并有可能在NAS端使用
   RADIUS代理。





Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 12]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   Advantages of dual authentication include support for authentication
   and accounting at both ends of the tunnel; use of a single
   userID/password pair via implementation of RADIUS on the tunnel
   network server; no requirement for telephone-number based
   authentication, or attribute-specific processing on the RADIUS
   server.
   双重认证的优点包括：对在两端认证和计费的支持；通过在隧道网络服务器的RADIUS实现，
   使用单一的用户ID/用户密码对；不需要基于电话号码的认证或在RADIUS服务器的
   属性说明处理。

   Dual authentication allows for accounting records to be generated on
   both the NAS and tunnel server ends, making auditing possible. Also
   the tunnel endpoint does not need to have an account relationship
   with the NAS owner, making this approach compatible with roaming.
   双重认证允许NAS和隧道服务器两端的计费记录的确保，使审计对帐成为可能。
   并且隧道终结点不需要和NAS所有者有账号上的关系，使此方式兼容了漫游。

   A disadvantage of dual authentication is that unless LCP forwarding
   is used, LCP will need to be renegotiated; some clients do not
   support it at all, and others only support only a subset of the dual
   authentication combinations. Feasible combinations include
   PAP/PAP(token), PAP/CHAP, PAP/EAP, CHAP/PAP(token), CHAP/CHAP,
   CHAP/EAP, EAP/CHAP, and EAP/EAP.  EAP is described in [5].
   双重认证的一个缺点是除非LCP转发被使用，LCP将需要重新协商；一些用户客户
   端完全不支持，另外一些仅仅支持双重认证集合的一个子集。可行的集合包括
   PAP/PAP（token），PAP/CHAP，PAP/EAP，CHAP/PAP（token），CHAP/CHAP，
   CHAP/EAP，EAP/CHAP，和EAP/EAP。EAP在〔5〕中描述。

   In the case of a dual authentication, a typical initiation sequence
   looks like this:
   在双重认证的情况下，典型的初始化序列如下：

   Client and NAS: PPP LCP negotiation
   Client and NAS: PPP authentication
   NAS to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request
   RADIUS server to NAS: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   Tunnel Server to NAS: L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP LCP re-negotiation (optional)
   Client and Tunnel Server: PPP authentication
   Tunnel Server to RADIUS Server: RADIUS Access-request (optional)
   RADIUS server to Tunnel Server: RADIUS Access-Accept/Access-Reject
   Client and Tunnel Server: NCP negotiation
   用户客户端和NAS：PPP LCP协商
   用户客户端和NAS：PPP认证
   NAS 到 RADIUS服务器：RADIUS 认证请求
   RADIUS服务器 到 NAS：RADIUS认证接受/拒绝
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP Incoming-Call-Request
   隧道服务器 到 NAS：L2TP Incoming-Call-Reply
   NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP  Incoming-Call-Connected
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：PPP LCP 重新协商（optional）
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：PPP 认证
   隧道服务器 到 RADIUS服务器：RADIUS 认证请求
   RADIUS服务器 到 隧道服务器：RADIUS认证接受/拒绝
   用户客户端和隧道服务器：NCP协商

   The process begins with an incoming call to the NAS. The client and
   NAS then begin LCP negotiation. Subsequently the PPP authentication
   phase starts, and the NAS sends a RADIUS Access-Request message to
   the RADIUS server. If the authentication is successful, the RADIUS
   server responds with a RADIUS Access-Accept containing tunnel
   attributes.
   此过程开始于到NAS的呼叫。然后用户客户端和NAS开始LCP协商。接着PPP认证
   阶段开始，并且NAS发送RADIUS认证请求消息到RADIUS服务器。如果认证成功，
   认证服务器回应包含隧道属性的认证接受。

   In the case where an L2TP tunnel is indicated, the NAS will now bring
   up a control connection if none existed before, and the NAS and
   tunnel server will bring up the call. At this point, data MAY begin
   to flow through the tunnel. The client and tunnel server MAY now
   renegotiate LCP and go through another round of PPP authentication.
   At the time that this renegotiation begins, the NAS SHOULD NOT have
   

Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 13]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   sent an LCP CONFACK completing LCP negotiation, and the client and
   NAS MUST NOT have begun NCP negotiation. Rather than sending an LCP
   CONFACK, the NAS will instead send an LCP Configure-Request packet,
   described in [6].  The Client MAY then renegotiate LCP, and from that
   point forward, all PPP packets originated from the client will be
   encapsulated and sent to the tunnel server.  When LCP re-negotiation
   has been concluded, the NCP phase will begin, and the tunnel server
   will assign an address to the client.
   在L2TP隧道被指明的情况下，如果控制连接不存在，NAS将在现在建立。到此时，
   数据可以（MAY）开始通过隧道传送。用户客户端和隧道服务器可以（MAY）现在
   重新协商LCP并进而进入下一轮的认证。在这重新协商开始的时候，NAS不能
   （SHOULD NOT）已经发送了一个LCP CONFACK 来结束LCP协商，并且NAS不应该
   （MUST NOT）已经开始NCP协商。于发送一个LCPCONFACK相反，NAS将发送一个
   LCP 配置请求（LCP Configure-Request）包，在〔6〕描述。然后用户客户端
   可以〔MAY〕重新协商LCP，从此时起，所有的源于用户客户端的PPP包将被封装
   并发送到隧道服务器。当LCP重新协商终结，NCP协商阶段将开始，隧道服务器
   将给用户客户端分配地址。
   

   If L2TP is being used as the tunnel protocol, the NAS MAY in its
   initial setup notification include a copy of the LCP CONFACKs sent in
   each direction which completed LCP negotiation. The tunnel server MAY
   then use this information to avoid an additional LCP negotiation.
   With L2TP, the initial setup notification can also include the
   authentication information required to allow the tunnel server to
   authenticate the user and decide to accept or decline the connection.
   However, this facility creates a vulnerability to replay attacks, and
   can create problems in the case where the NAS and tunnel server
   authenticate against different RADIUS servers. As a result, where
   user-based tunneling via RADIUS is implemented, L2TP authentication
   forwarding SHOULD NOT be employed.
   如果L2TP被用作为隧道协议，NAS可以在初始化建立通知中包含一份发向各方向的
   LCP CONFACK拷贝，此LCP CONFACK是用来完成LCP协商的。然后隧道服务器可以
   （MAY）使用这些信息来避免LCP重新协商。对于L2TP，初始化建立通知还能包含
   必要的认证信息，这些信息允许隧道服务器来认证用户并觉得是接受或拒绝连接。
   但是，这中便利会导致回应攻击的弱点，并在NAS和隧道服务器使用不同的RADIUS
   服务器的情况下导致问题。其结果，当通过RADIUS基于用户的隧道连接被应用的
   话，L2TP认证转发不能（SHOULD NOT）被使用。

   In performing the PPP authentication, the tunnel server can access
   its own user database, or it MAY send a RADIUS Access-Request.  After
   the tunnel has been brought up, the NAS and tunnel server can start
   accounting.
   在进行PPP认证的时候，隧道服务器能访问自己的用户数据库，或者可以（MAY）
   发送RADIUS认证请求。在隧道建立以后，NAS和隧道服务器可以开始计费。

   The interactions involved in initiation of a compulsory tunnel with
   dual authentication are summarized below.、
   使用双重认证的强制隧道初始化涉及的交互过程简述如下：






















Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 14]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


                                  INITIATION SEQUENCE

   NAS                            Tunnel Server       RADIUS Server
   ---                            -------------       -------------
   Call accepted
   LCP starts
   PPP authentication
    phase starts
   Send RADIUS
    Access-Request
    with userID and
    authentication data
  呼叫接受
  LCP 协商开始
  PPP 认证阶段开始
  发送 RADIUS 认证请求
      包含用户ID和认证数据
  
                                                      IF authentication
                                                      succeeds
                                                       Send ACK
                                                      ELSE Send NAK
                                                      如果 认证成功
                                                          发送 ACK
                                                      否则
                                                           发送 NAK
   IF NAK DISCONNECT
   ELSE
    IF no control
     connection exists
     Send
     Start-Control-Connection-Request
     to Tunnel Server
   如果 NAK 切断连接
   否则
     如果 没有控制连接存在
     发送 Start-Control-Connection-Request
     到隧道服务器
                                Send
                                Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                to NAS
                                发送Start-Control-Connection-Reply
                                到 NAS
    ENDIF
    结束

   Send
   Incoming-Call-Request
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送Incoming-Call-Request
   消息到隧道服务器
                                Send Incoming-Call-Reply
                                to NAS
                                发送Incoming-Call-Reply
                                到 NAS
   Send
   Incoming-Call-Connected
   message to Tunnel Server
   发送Incoming-Call-Connected
   消息到隧道服务器

   Send data through the tunnel
   通过隧道传送数据
                                Re-negotiate LCP,
                                authenticate user,
                                bring up IPCP,
                                start accounting
                                重新协商 LCP
                                认证用户
                                建立IPCP
                                开始计费
   ENDIF
   结束








Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 15]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


5.  Termination sequence
    终结步骤

   The tear down of a compulsory tunnel involves an interaction between
   the client, NAS and Tunnel Server. This interaction is virtually
   identical regardless of whether telephone-number based
   authentication, single authentication, or dual authentication is
   being used.  In any of the cases, the following events occur:

        Tunnel Server to NAS: L2TP Call-Clear-Request (optional)
        NAS to Tunnel Server: L2TP Call-Disconnect-Notify

   Tunnel termination can occur due to a client request (PPP
   termination), a tunnel server request (Call-Clear-Request), or a line
   problem (call disconnect).
   强制隧道的拆除涉及用户客户端的交互、NAS和隧道服务器间的交互。此交互过程
   实质上是相同的，不管使用的是基于电话号码的认证，单一认证还是双重认证。在
   所有的情形下，如下的事件发生：
       
        隧道服务器到NAS：L2TP Call-Clear-Request（optional）
        NAS 到 隧道服务器：L2TP Call-Disconnect-Notify
        
   隧道终结会由于用户客户端请求（PPP 终结）、隧道服务器请求（Call-Clear-Request）
   或者线路问题（呼叫断线）而发生。

   In the case of a client-requested termination, the tunnel server MUST
   terminate the PPP session. The tunnel server MUST subsequently send a
   Call-Clear-Request to the NAS. The NAS MUST then send a Call-
   Disconnect-Notify message to the tunnel server, and will disconnect
   the call.

   The NAS MUST also respond with a Call-Disconnect-Notify message and
   disconnection if it receives a Call-Clear-Request from the tunnel
   server without a client-requested termination.

   In the case of a line problem or user hangup, the NAS MUST send a
   Call-Disconnect-Notify to the tunnel server. Both sides will then
   tear down the call.

   The interactions involved in termination of a compulsory tunnel are
   summarized below. In order to simplify the diagram that follows, we
   have left out the client. However, it is understood that the client
   MAY participate via PPP termination and disconnection.
   在用户客户端请求的终结情况下，隧道服务器应该（MUST）终结PPP会话。隧道
   服务器应该（MUST）随后发送一个Call-Clear-Request到NAS。然后NAS必须
   （MUST）发送一个Call-Disconnect-Notify消息到隧道服务器，并将切断呼叫
   连接。
   
   如果NAS从隧道服务器收到一个没有用户客户端请求终结的Call-Clear-Request，
   NAS 也必须（MUST）回应一个Call-Disconnect-Notify消息并切断连接。
   
   在线路问题或用户挂断的情形下，NAS必须（MUST）发送一个Call-Disconnect-Notify
   到隧道服务器。两端都将拆除呼叫连接。
   
   强制隧道终结涉及的交互过程简述如下。为了简化下面的流程，我们忽略了用户
   客户端。但是，用户客户端通过PPP终结和切断来参与流程是可理解的。

















Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 16]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


                                  TERMINATION SEQUENCE

   NAS                            Tunnel Server         RADIUS Server
   ---                            -------------         -------------
   IF user disconnected
    send
    Call-Disconnect-Notify
    message to tunnel server
   如果  用户断线
       发送Call-Disconnect-Notify
       消息到隧道服务器
                                  Tear down the call
                                  stop accounting
                                  拆除呼叫连接
                                  停止计费
   ELSE IF client requests
    termination
    否则如果 用户客户端请求终结
                                  send
                                  Call-Clear-Request
                                  to the NAS
                                  发送 Call-Clear-Request
                                  到 NAS
    Send
    Call-Disconnect-Notify
    message to tunnel server
    Disconnect the user
    发送 Call-Disconnect-Notify
    消息到隧道服务器
    切断用户
                                  Tear down the call
                                  stop accounting
                                  拆除呼叫连接
                                  停止计费
   ENDIF
   结束

6.  Use of distinct RADIUS servers
    使用独立的RADIUS服务器

   In the case that the NAS and the tunnel server are using distinct
   RADIUS servers, some interesting cases can arise in the provisioning
   of compulsory tunnels.
   在NAS和隧道服务器各自使用独立的RADIUS服务器的情况下，强制隧道提供中
   一些有趣的情况会出现。

6.1.  Distinct userIDs
      独立的用户ID（userIDs）

   If distinct RADIUS servers are being used, it is likely that distinct
   userID/password pairs will be required to complete the RADIUS and
   tunnel authentications. One pair will be used in the initial PPP
   authentication with the NAS, and the second pair will be used for
   authentication at the tunnel server.

   This has implications if the NAS attempts to forward authentication
   information to the tunnel server in the initial setup notification.
   Since the userID/password pair used for tunnel authentication is
   different from that used to authenticate against the NAS, forwarding
   authentication information in this manner will cause the tunnel
   authentication to fail. As a result, where user-based tunneling via
   RADIUS is implemented, L2TP authentication forwarding SHOULD NOT be
   employed.
   
   如果独立的RADIUS服务器被使用，可能将需要独立的用户ID/密码对
   （userID/password pairs）来完成RADIUS和隧道认证。一对将被用作NAS的初始化
   PPP认证，第二队将被用作在隧道服务器的认证。
   
   如果NAS尝试在初始化建立通知中转发认证信息到隧道服务器，这就会有牵连。
   既然用来隧道认证的用户ID/密码对和用来NAS认证的不同，通过这种方式转发
   认证信息将会导致隧道认证失败。此导致的结果，在通过RADIUS的基于用户的隧道
   连接被应用的话，L2TP认证转发不该（SHOULD NOT）被使用。
   






Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 17]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   In order to provide maximum ease of use in the case where the
   userID/password pairs are identical, tunnel clients typically attempt
   authentication with the same userID/password pair as was used in the
   initial PPP negotiation. Only after this fails do they prompt the
   user for the second pair. Rather than putting up an error message
   indicating an authentication failure, it is preferable to present a
   dialog requesting the tunnel userID/password combination.

   A similar issue arises when extended authentication methods are being
   used, as is enabled by EAP, described in [5]. In particular, when
   one-time passwords or cryptographic calculators are being used,
   different passwords will be used for the first and second
   authentications. Thus the user will need to be prompted to enter the
   second password.
   
   为了提供在用户ID/密码对一致情况下最大的简易度，隧道客户端典型的尝试使用
   PPP协商中的相同的用户ID/密码对来进行认证。只有这失败后，客户端提示用户
   输入第二对。相比提供出错消息来表示认证失败，更好的是显示一个请求（输入）
   隧道用户ID/密码结合的对话框。
   
   使用扩展认证方法时会出现相似的问题，如EAP，在〔5〕中描述。详细说，当
   一次性密码和密码计算器被使用的时候，第一次和第二次认证将使用不同的密码。
   因此用户需要被提示输入第二个密码。

6.2.  Multilink PPP issues
      多链路 PPP 问题

   It is possible for the two RADIUS servers to return different Port-
   Limit attributes.  For example, it is conceivable that the NAS RADIUS
   server will only grant use of a single channel, while the tunnel
   RADIUS server will grant more than one channel. In this case, the
   correct behavior is for the tunnel client to open a connection to
   another NAS in order to bring up a multilink bundle on the tunnel
   server. The client MUST NOT indicate to the NAS that this additional
   link is being brought up as part of a multilink bundle; this will
   only be indicated in the subsequent negotiation with the tunnel
   server.

   It is also conceivable that the NAS RADIUS server will allow the
   client to bring up multiple channels, but that the tunnel RADIUS
   server will allow fewer channels than the NAS RADIUS server. In this
   case, the client should terminate use of the excess channels.
   
   两个RADIUS服务器返回不同的端口限制属性是可能的。例如：NAS的RADIUS服务器
   将仅仅同意一个通道的使用，而隧道的RADIUS服务器将同意多个通道的使用，这种
   情况是可以想像得到的。在这中情况下，正确的行为是隧道客户端打开到另一NAS
   的连接来在隧道服务器上建立一束多链路。用户客户端不应该（MUST NOT）对NAS
   指明这另加的链路是被当做一束多链路的部分被创建的；这将仅仅在随后的和隧道
   服务器的协商中被指明。
   
   NAS RADIUS 服务器将允许用户客户端来创建多通道，但隧道RADIUS服务器将允许
   比NAS RADIUS服务器少的通道，此情况也是可以想像的。在这中情况下，用户客户端
   须停止多余通道的使用。

7.  UserID Issues
    用户ID问题

   In the provisioning of roaming and shared use networks, one of the
   requirements is to be able to route the authentication request to the
   user's home RADIUS server. This authentication routing is
   accomplished based on the userID submitted by the user to the NAS in
   the initial PPP authentication. The userID is subsequently relayed by
   the NAS to the RADIUS server in the User-Name attribute, as part of
   the RADIUS Access-Request.

   Similarly, [2] refers to use of the userID in determining the tunnel
   endpoint, although it does not provide guidelines for how RADIUS or
   tunnel routing is to be accomplished. Thus the possibility of
   conflicting interpretations exists.
   
   在提供漫游和共享网络的情况下，其中的一种需求就是能转发认证请求到用户的
   宿主RADIUS服务器。这种转发是基于在初始化PPP认证中用户提供给NAS的用户ID
   （userID）来完成的。此用户ID（userID）随后被NAS在用户名（User-Name）属性
   中作为RADIUS认证的一部分转递到RADIUS服务器。

   相似的，〔2〕指明了用户ID在决定隧道终结点中的使用，虽然它并没有提供RADIUS
   或隧道服务器如何完成转发的指导策略。因此存在相互冲突的解释的可能。


Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 18]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


   The use of RADIUS in provisioning of compulsory tunneling relieves
   the userID from having to do double duty. Rather than being used both
   for routing of the RADIUS authentication/authorization request as
   well for determination of the tunnel endpoint, the userID is now used
   solely for routing of RADIUS authentication/authorization requests.
   Tunnel attributes returned in the RADIUS Access-Response are then
   used to determine the tunnel endpoint.

   Since the framework described in this document allows both ISPs and
   tunnel users to authenticate users as well as to account for
   resources consumed by them, and provides for maintenance of two
   distinct userID/password pairs, this scheme provides a high degree of
   flexibility.  Where RADIUS proxies and tunneling are employed, it is
   possible to allow the user to authenticate with a single
   userID/password pair at both the NAS and the tunnel endpoint. This is
   accomplished by routing the NAS RADIUS Access-Request to the same
   RADIUS server used by the tunnel server.
   
   在强制隧道连接中使用RADIUS解除了用户ID需要做的双重工作。与同时被使用来
   转发RADIUS认证/授权请求和决定隧道终结点相反，用户ID现在仅仅被使用为转发
   RADIUS 认证/授权请求。由在RADIUS接受回应中返回的隧道属性来决定隧道的终结点。
   
   因为此文档中描述的框架结构允许ISP和隧道用户同时认证和对耗费资源的计费，并提供
   对两对不同用户ID/密码对的支持，此方案提供了高度的灵活性。在RADIUS代理和隧道连接
   被使用的情况下，允许用户使用单一用户ID/密码在NAS和隧道终结点进行认证是可能的。
   这通过转发NAS RADIUS认证请求到隧道服务器使用的相同RADIUS服务器来完成。

8.  References

   [1]  Rigney C., Rubens A., Simpson W. and S. Willens, "Remote
        Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2138, April
        1997.

   [2]  Townsley, W., Valencia, A., Rubens, A., Pall, G., Zorn, G. and
        Palter, B., "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"", RFC 2661,
        August 1999.

   [3]  Zorn, G., Leifer, D., Rubens, A., Shriver, J., Holdrege, M. and
        Goyret, I., "RADIUS Attributes for Tunnel Protocol Support",
        Work in Progress.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [5]  Blunk, L. anf J. Vollbrecht, "PPP Extensible Authentication
        Protocol (EAP)", RFC 2284, March 1998.

   [6]  Simpson, W., Editor, "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD
        51, RFC 1661, July 1994.











Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 19]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


9.  Security Considerations

   In PPP-based tunneling, PPP security is negotiated between the client
   and the tunnel server, and covers the entire length of the path. This
   is because the client does not have a way to know that they are being
   tunneled. Thus, any security the NAS may negotiate with the tunnel
   server will occur in addition to that negotiated between the client
   and NAS.

   In L2TP compulsory tunneling, this means that PPP encryption and
   compression will be negotiated between the client and the tunnel
   server.  In addition, the NAS may bring up an IPSEC security
   association between itself and the tunnel server. This adds
   protection against a number of possible attacks.

   Where RADIUS proxies are deployed, the Access-Reply sent by the
   RADIUS server may be processed by one or more proxies prior to being
   received by the NAS.  In order to ensure that tunnel attributes
   arrive without modification, intermediate RADIUS proxies forwarding
   the Access-Reply MUST NOT modify tunnel attributes. If the RADIUS
   proxy does not support tunnel attributes, then it MUST send an
   Access-Reject to the NAS. This is necessary to ensure that the user
   is only granted access if the services requested by the RADIUS server
   can be provided.

   Since RADIUS tunnel attributes are used for compulsory tunneling,
   address assignment is handled by the tunnel server rather than the
   NAS.  As a result, if tunnel attributes are present, the NAS MUST
   ignore any address assignment attributes sent by the RADIUS server.
   In addition, the NAS and client MUST NOT begin NCP negotiation, since
   this could create a time window in which the client will be capable
   of sending packets to the transport network, which is not permitted
   in compulsory tunneling.
   
   在基于PPP的隧道连接中，PPP安全在用户客户端和隧道服务器间被协商，并贯穿
   了整个长度的路径。这是因为用户客户端并不知道它们使用了隧道。因此，NAS
   可以和隧道服务器协商的所有的安全性都可以附加在用户客户端和NAS的协商上
   发生。
   
   在L2TP的强制隧道连接中,这意味着PPP加密和压缩可以在用户客户端和隧道服务器
   间协商。作为附加，NAS可以在自己和隧道服务器间创建一条IPSEC 安全连接。这
   为一些可能的攻击提供了保护。
   
   当RADIUS代理被部署时，RADIUS服务器发送的认证接受在到达NAS前可能被一个或
   多个代理处理。为了保证到达的隧道属性没有被修改，中间的转发接受回应的
   RADIUS代理不应该（MUST NOT）修改隧道属性。如果RADIUS代理不支持隧道属性，
   那么它必须（MUST）发送一个认证拒绝到NAS。为了确保用户仅仅在RADIUS服务器
   能提供被要求的服务的情况下被授权访问，这是必须的。
   
   既然RADIUS隧道属性被强制隧道连接使用，地址分配由隧道服务器完成，而不是NAS。
   导致的结果，到隧道属性被提供，NAS必须（MUST）任何RADIUS服务器发送的地址
   分配属性。另外，NAS和用户客户端间不应该（MUST NOT）开始NCP协商，因为这可能
   会创建一个时间窗，在这用户客户端将能发送包到传输网络，而这种情况在强制隧道
   连接中是不允许的。

10.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Gurdeep Singh Pall of Microsoft for many useful discussions
   of this problem space, and to Allan Rubens of Tut Systems and
   Bertrand Buclin of AT&T Labs Europe for their comments on this
   document.

   Most of the work on this document was performed while Glen Zorn was
   employed by the Microsoft Corporation.








Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 20]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


11.  Chair's Address

   The RADIUS Working Group can be contacted via the current chair:

   Carl Rigney
   Livingston Enterprises
   4464 Willow Road
   Pleasanton, California  94588

   Phone: +1 510-426-0770
   EMail: cdr@livingston.com

12.  Authors' Addresses

   Bernard Aboba
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA 98052

   Phone: +1 425-936-6605
   EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com


   Glen Zorn
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   500 108th Avenue N.E., Suite 500
   Bellevue, WA 98004
   USA

   Phone: +1 425 438 8218
   FAX:   +1 425 438 1848
   EMail: gwz@cisco.com



















Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 21]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


13.  Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.






























Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 22]

RFC 2809          L2TP Compulsory Tunneling via RADIUS        April 2000


14.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Aboba & Zorn                 Informational                     [Page 23]

